On the Nature of Human Assembly

What is the overall idea?

When people gather together, a group naturally forms. In many
cases, it is desirable to have these natural groups persist in 
time and have their existence be sustainable over the long term. 
However, given the highly dynamic nature of interpersonal 
communications and the variety of life events, developing the 
right infrastructure for long term group success is far from easy. 
This essay presents a model and pattern for one such infrastructure.

Introduction

In any grouping of people, there needs to be some sort of
organizational principle, even if it is very informal or 
implicit, that allows each person, each member, to more 
effectively coordinate their own individual actions with 
respect to the intents of the group as a whole.  As groups 
get larger, the need for an explicit internal structure 
increases.  For very large groups this need for formal 
complexity becomes significant. 

Yet, despite the many examples of large governments, 
institutions, industries, etc, that currently exist, 
the organizational principles necessary for them to be 
sustainable are far from obvious.  In may cases, it is 
not even obvious that they are sustainable at all -- 
sometimes even large bodies fail without a single 
identifiable cause.  Attempting to found a new group 
or institution on the basis of an existing one can 
often result in transparently, unconsciously, and implicitly 
inheriting the weaknesses of the existing system.  Without 
an awareness of the principles of group formation, there can 
be little hope of real group longevity in the face of 
significant enviromental or situational changes. 

However, rather than attempting to deal with the complexity 
of large scale groups directly, it is considered that 
sustainable group systems can be identified by 1) 
resolving a minimal abstract set of organizational concepts 
(one which would span the total space of all organizational 
systems) and 2) using those concepts to define the minimum 
possible structure necessary to create a sustainable group. 
Once the basic principles of long term group stability 
have been identified in their simplest 'ideal' form, the 
way is opened for the practical application of these ideals 
to real groups. 

In effect, it is considered that if any group can be made 
sustainable, that the dynamics of that group can be treated 
as a 'cell' and composed into larger groups which will also 
be sustainable (using the same techniques as that internal 
to the prototypical cell group itself).  Therefore, the 
issues associated with group scale can be factored out. 
This allows the consideration of sustainability to be applied 
to small groups (with minimum complexity) as if they are 
representative of all groups.  Of primary interest then is 
what sort of minimal organizational dynamics would enable 
any small group to be sustainable.

Coherency assumptions particular to small groups

For the purposes of this essay, some assumptions have been made
about the motivations of the individuals who choose to gather 
themselves into an intentional group.  Particularly, it is 
assumed that each member is motivated and enabled to achieve the 
benefits of combining their efforts with others in as positive 
and as natural a manner as possible.  By "enabled" it is meant 
that each member is sufficiently knowledgeable about themselves 
and each other to achieve the necessary alignment of personal 
intent in group action.  This is particularly apparent in situations 
where the group may be required to respond quickly and decisively 
to external situations.  For example, the members of a local fire 
department will need to trust one another and one another's real and 
embodied skills to effectively respond to the rapidly changing 
situation of a fire.  The strength of an emergency response group 
a group is largely dependent on the health of the members and such 
groups will particularly require strong interpersonal bonds and 
mutual trust between all members.  Although not all groups may 
need to be this obviously and rapidly responsive, the internal 
general structure of a generic group must have the capacity 
to support these capabilities (should need arise).  This need for 
capability sets a requirement on what group organization principles 
will ultimately be considered viable (more on this below). 

Also, it is assumed that the activities of the group are intended 
to be of mutual benefit to the membership, community, and larger 
world (ie, a criterion of sustainability).  Achieving these conditions 
is a precursor to group formation.  The means by which individuals 
can attain the sufficient level of personal health is beyond the 
scope of this essay.  However, insofar as the continued and 
sustained health of each member is especially important to the 
continuance and sustainability of the group itself, the ideas of 
an organizational principle of a group must itself be considered 
in terms of nurturing strength.  In particular, the best overall 
effectiveness of the group will occur when the relationships between 
members, and the feelings of each member about the group as a 
whole, are each nurturing of strength.  The degree to which the 
health and strength of the group is maintained is therefore also a 
basis for considering the effectiveness of a potential group 
organizational principle.  This can be thought of as also consistent 
with a notion of ethics which asserts a connection of the means by 
which something is achieved and the nature of the ends which are realized. 
For small groups just starting out, the focus of activity and intent 
for the group must therefore be on establishing and maintaining the 
emotional, intellectual, and communicative health of each member and 
of member interactions prior to the group having an overall externally 
coherent action or intent as a whole.  Small groups are therefore 
first defined in terms of inner growth before they can be self defined 
in terms of outer action and intent.

Structural archtypes for group orginization

In considering the many and various organizational models and principles
that have been previously used to coordinate all sorts of groups, 
a categorical analysis of the primary forms and structures will identify 
three basic and fundamental types of decision making process.  For the 
purposes of this essay, these three primary forms of decision making will 
be referred to as 'the democracy', 'the meritocracy', and 'the consensus'. 
(Note: These categories are known to be conceptually orthogonal insofar 
as other and more complex types of organization can be shown to be a 
scalar or linear superposition of these three basic types). 

The three notions of an organizing principle can be briefly described 
(in a characteristically simplified form) as follows: 

      In a democracy, a range of possible options is reviewed, discussion 
      and persuasion (rhetoric) is followed by a vote, and the majority 
      decision applies to the whole. 

      In a meritocracy, some process (it does not matter which), is used 
      to select a focus of decision making (a single person or smaller 
      group), which then (perhaps after listening to the considered 
      council of others) will make a decision which is applied to the 
      whole.  It is assumed that the whole will always and implicitly 
      trust the part to make decisions 'correctly' (whatever that notion 
      is taken to mean for the whole group). 

      In consensus, all members sit in council together and discuss 
      potential decisions together until a complete and total agreement 
      is reached among all members (however long it takes) which then 
      becomes the decision of the group. 

Of these three basic types of organizing principle, smaller groups will 
generally be best organized using the method of consensus.  When first forming, 
consensus methods are the inherent default starting point for any group 
dynamic (at least insofar as each member is freely able to determine for 
themselves if they actually belong to the group).  Consensus decision 
making has significant advantages in regards to unity, integrity, and strength. 
Consensus, as a method of making group decisions, contributes to good feelings, 
clear intents, and insight on the part of each member.  In consensus, 
each person has the freedom of complete contribution and may participate 
fully in the total agreement.  It is important that each member has 
good feelings about the resulting decisions and a willingness to 
participate fully in the action of the whole, particularly since this 
has the effect of increasing the depth and the overall effectiveness of 
the group in any action actually performed.   The more whole and integral the group, 
and the better that each member feels about the others, the the stronger 
the group and the stronger and more generally beneficial the results. 
The sustainability of the outcome is in proportion to the strength and 
unity of the group.  Thus, to a first approximation, consensus 
is seen to contribute directly to group effectiveness. 

However, on deeper consideration it becomes apparent that each of 
these three organizing principles has some real disadvantages, and 
consensus is not excepted.  Consensus, although it usually achieves 
very high quality decisions, also takes the most time to implement. 
Consensus requires frequent, continued, and sustained interaction of 
the whole group.  Not all members may be as constantly and fully 
available for the necessary and ongoing interaction and communication 
that necessary for consensus decision making.  Even in the best of 
circumstances, it is often difficult to find and coordinate the 
necessary long meeting times inherent in the consensus process. 
Furthermore, in situations requiring immediate decisive action, 
(such as within the context of unexpected events and/or emergency), 
consensus is completely unable to mediate fast, vital, 
and necessary choice.  As such, consensus, although it is very strong 
in quality, is also the very weakest in the sense of being the least 
powerful (in quantity) of the three decision making methods summarized 
above.  While the group is microscopically coherent, it is in some cases 
macroscopically ineffective. 

In contrast to consensus, systems of meritocracy, such as those having 
a single person or small unit of people in some sort of hierarchical structure, 
are the most powerful.  Meritocratic organizations, particularly in a 
fast changing environment, are the most able to deal with situations requiring 
immediate and decisive action (for example, any situation involving emergency or 
danger).  Such organizations are generally flexible and are usually 
the most effective in implementing powerful action with the highest 
levels of effectiveness, due to their coordinated quality and 
their focused and singular purity of intent.  Both strength and 
flexibility are necessary for a group as a whole for it to remain 
sustainable. 

Unfortunately, as is well known, meritocratic systems, no matter how well 
intended, are also the most susceptible to unconstrained abuse (although 
powerful, meritocratic systems are infrequently also strong).  For a 
group to last in a changing environment (where the rate of change can 
sometimes be high) some element of meritocratic or executive organization 
is desirable and useful in any real group.  Yet, due to the potentiality 
for abuse the meritocratic method of organization is the also the most 
likely to develop seriously disabling aspects and painful effects 
for the group members.  Any occurrence of the negative aspects in 
a meritocratic organization can quickly diminish the overall effectiveness, 
health, and sustainability of a group due to less than committed component 
actions on the part of the members.  While the macroscopic aspects of 
the group are maintained, the microscopic aspects suffer.  Over time, 
these small scale instabilities can magnify into larger concerns that 
destabilize the group (coup events or other cancerous instabilities). 

In recognizing the marked disadvantages of the meritocracy, and as an 
attempt at moderating the demands for time and communication required 
by consensus, one might consider the method of democracy to be the best 
overall alternative.  In a democratic system, everyone gets 1) a chance 
to think about the issues, 2) the option to make their choice known 
(as selected from a fixed and finite set of options), and 3) a chance 
to convince others of the correctness of their viewpoints.  In this 
system, less in person and in council time and communication are 
required than that needed for consensus.  Democratic methods often 
appear simpler to define (in the short term at least), and the decisions 
made by the group are usually (seemingly) unambiguous (and therefore 
simpler to implement).  There is additionally a feeling of security and 
freedom to choose with ones heart when anonymity is used as part of the 
voting process.  Also, the democratic system overall tends to be much 
more resistant to overt abuse than a meritocracy.  Such a system, 
furthermore, is well suited to groups that cannot often meet or 
communicate directly, and which therefore must use some form of 
messaging.  Any group communication based primarily on messaging would 
be too cumbersome to use for consensus decision making, and too slow and 
dis-empowering for everyone when used as part of a meritocratic system. 

As such, the democratic system of organization seems initially to be a 
better balance of consensus, which makes decisions well (i.e., good 
quality of choice), and authority, which makes decisions fast (i.e., 
good quantity of choice).  Unfortunately, the democratic method of 
organization has significant flaws as well, particularly when applied 
to groups having a more familiar or tribal character. 

The process of voting requires that the issues be clear cut and 
partitionable into a finite set of specific options which can be 
voted on.  Unfortunately in life, most such issues are rarely so 
clear cut.  Real issues of value are often associated with various 
feelings, personal emotions, and subjective intuitions.  Further, 
insofar as creative decision making is about opening new potentialities 
and working with the unknown and unknowable, the attempt to reduce 
a problem to a finite set of specific options is very problematic. 
The reduction of a hard and subtle value problem into such a finite 
specificity as required for a vote must be regarded as being nearly 
antithetical to any possibility of success. 

Moreover, the process of choosing which options will be in the 
total set of available options to be voted on is an often neglected 
form of power which is frequently, but invisibly, abused in itself. 
The context of the choice to be made, and the context in which the 
choice is made, are themselves rarely the object of a democratic 
process (it is a problem of regress which can be diminished, but 
never completely and finitely resolved).  This covert shifting of 
context can be seen, for example, in the efforts of a used car 
salesman to enact the reality of one's primary choice as being 
between buying the red car or the blue one, whereas the real choice 
is whether or not to buy a vehicle at all.  Often, it is only in 
the action of shifting the context of choice that a real solution 
can be found.  The practice of democracy encourages a form of covert 
abuse in making it always necessary to choose from a finite set of 
options, whereas in real life, the number of options available is 
always infinite. 

To make matters worse, the action of the vote itself does little 
to create group cohesiveness, necessary to the long term sustainability 
of the group.  Majority rule, particularly if that majority is very 
slight (51%), is oppressive to the minority necessarily left remaining. 
The action of voting encourages a polarization, a schism of opinion, 
between two factions. Even though the schism incurred by the voting 
process is very obvious, the democratic method does not provide a means 
to heal that division; it is an unavoidable divisiveness created by the 
method itself. 

Meritocracy and consensus both tend to heal such schisms of opinion 
either through insight (the creation of a third additional option) 
or through negotiation. Divisiveness is an especially problematic 
element of democratic process in that it diminishes the unity of feeling 
in a group.  The larger and lasting benefit of group action is in 
geometric (or stronger) proportion a total coherency of group consciousness 
operating as one together.  Two members working together can be much 
stronger than having both work alone, yet the democratic method nearly 
always splits a group into at least two disagreeing fractions, those for 
and those against. By encouraging a false simplicity, much clarity and 
depth of action is lost (creativity, spirituality, and awareness are 
best enabled by clarity). 

Furthermore, the minority must always feel unhappy with the 'group' 
decision, the outcome of the vote when they are forced to accept the 
'will of the whole'.  Members losing the vote must necessarily override 
their own feelings and opinions.  Democracy encourages a suppression of 
feeling; an action for the 'right' to have a vote, a fleeting voice, 
in the decision at all (a voice, moreover, that is often reduced to 
insignificance and meaninglessness in even moderately large groups). 
Choice (and significance) is inherent in consciousness, at all levels 
of being.  It is not 'licensed' from the whole to the part, or even 
from the part to the whole. To make choice seem to be a temporary and 
possibly revocable 'right' (for which one must barter their 
unconditional acceptance of the unconscious tyranny of the majority, as 
the democratic system must make it seem), is to act in a manner contrary 
to fundamental truths of life itself: the true ownership of one's own 
choices, the significance and meaningfulness of all choosing, and the 
cooperative process by which all choice IS made.  In its worst forms, 
democracy becomes a process antithetical to the dynamics of life, having 
more the nature of a cancer than of a living being working as a unity 
(and there are yet deeper layers of symbolism in this, for those who 
have the eyes to see it!).  To have an action or a process be contrary 
to life is to go directly against the interests of the group itself. 

Worse still, the dialog that precedes the vote is itself subtly 
flawed and distorted.  In that a vote is an event, the timing of 
which is always finite and near, it encourages the action of speaking 
rather than of listening, expressing rather than accepting.  In fixing 
the time of a vote, communication becomes rushed and is soon replaced 
by lecture and campaign.  Busy activity replaces the reflective space 
necessary for insight, creativity, and the more inward forms of 
communication inherent in the process of attaining truly effective 
decisions. 

Also, in being only about expression, the dialog presented before 
the vote (ideally) would consist of (or have the form of, or at 
least appear to be) reasonable arguments which are impersonal, 
objective, and based only on logic and facts.  Yet such dialog must 
always have the implicit objective, form, and purpose of convincing 
others to vote in the same manner as oneself.  In that such expression 
must therefore hide one's own personal subjective values and natural 
desires (which ultimately can have no logical or reasonable basis) 
within arguments which are designed to appear to be based on 
impersonal objectivity and reason, the ideal dialog before the vote 
is inherently deceptive.  In this, artfully constructed fictions 
replace actual fact; reactions to images, symbols, and flags are used 
to replace feelings of inner truth with emotions of fear and pride. 
The ideal of democracy becomes only an expression of rhetoric before 
the vote, a means of manipulation which justified in the terms of the 
end of having others vote (or act) in some limited manner.  Rhetoric 
cannot be trusted, even and especially when it appears to be 
trustworthy. In that a group is inherently based on mutual regard and 
trust, a transparent, considered, and conscious communication is 
necessary for effectiveness. 

To use rhetoric to encourage others to replace their thoughts with 
those of the speaker, is in effect, to treat them as a machine, to 
inherently regard them less intelligent and significant than oneself. 
In this, concerns about the outcome of the vote override all concerns 
for the people participating.  As a result, everyone (including the 
"winners") feel like they have lost something important, some element 
of truth and honor has been neglected.  Inwardly everyone knows 
intuitively that the means used (deception and control of the vote) 
cannot ever be justified in the terms of the ends, no matter how well 
intentioned ("for the good of all").  One cannot value people and their 
lives (life) by attempting to treat them (and all of nature) in the 
manner of an ignorant and discardable machine.  Insofar as the group 
values sustainability and life, these intents values must also be 
reflected as an aspect of its practice, its realization, and its identity. 

As such, the practice of democracy, and the politics it implies, 
is by its very nature very disabling to the sustainability of a 
small group.   The methods of 
democracy strongly discourage participants from ever considering 
matters of personal feeling and intuition in a natural manner. 
The process of campaign is an invasive intrusion into one's own 
inner dynamics of creativity; an evolution which is very necessary 
when choosing with an alignment with the inner nature of life.  While an 
authoritarian meritocracy has features that lend themselves to an 
easy and overt abuse, a democracy is not much better in that it 
lends itself to a covert abuse. 
Yet, as has been described, neither consensus nor merit, as 
potential methods for organizing a group, are ideal either.  All 
three methods when practiced by themselves are inherently flawed 
when considered in terms of the requirements of sustainable 
group process. 

Therefore, it is necessary to develop some other, alternate method 
for organizing a groups which somehow combine the good effects of the 
values of consensus decision making with power and decisiveness of 
meritocratic methods.  Ideally, the alternative must 
not introduce the known disabling effects associated with democracy, 
merit, or consensus.  What is needed is a method for combining into 
a new hybrid the high quality aspects of consensus decision making 
with the high quantity of decision available from a meritocracy, 
without introducing new disadvantages and potentials for abuse 
inherent in each of these other forms.  In answer to this, this 
essay will therefore consider an alternate method of combination 
these forms to create a hybrid small group organization principle.

Group method hybredization; a proposal

The basis of the hybridization is to have the decisions of whatever
the group DOES be defined in the terms of an organization of what the 
group IS.  In other words, the dynamics of the group can be considered 
in terms of two aspects in relation to one another: internal group 
process and external group interactions ("is" and "does", or intra-group 
and inter-group, respectively).  In that the group internal process and 
the group external process are in relation to one another, this 
relation is also an identified category of group process (since the 
meta-dynamics 'is' and 'does' must also be in relation to one another). 
In effect, there needs to be a natural means for the group to transition 
from being to doing and then again transition back from doing to being. 
The organizational principle which applies to this transition dynamic 
is as necessary to the overall model as the organizational principles 
which are individually applied to the being and doing of the group. 

The result of these considerations is to 
identify and use different decision making aspects at and for different 
parts of the overall group process.  As such, 
the method of consensus is to be used for 
all organizational and planning aspects of the group 
(omniscient modal aspects), 
merit     is to be used as the basis of operation during actual 
group action (executing a plan; immanent modal aspects), 
and democracy is to be used as a moderator on the transition 
from meritocracy back to consensus (transcendent modal aspects). 

This simple method of combination provides for the working group 
to have the best advantages of each basic decision making process, 
while having few to none of the disadvantages implied by each. 
The basis of the necessary correspondences are identified by modeling 
the group in terms of identity and interaction theory (as intra-group 
and inter-group theory, respectively).  Each of these aspects will be 
considered in its own paragraph below. 

Intra-group 
process is an isomorph of the subjective, and therefore needs to have 
full coherency and (eventually clear) representation of the overall 
deep feelings and future dreams of the group.  Consensus process is 
the best choice (optimal) when assigned to group internal dynamics, 
particularly insofar as coherency is much more important than rapidity 
when defining and identifying the group identity (the long term structure 
of the group).  The key of this assignment is to recognize that with 
respect to all elements of the intra-group process, that consensus 
is the ultimate founding basis and therefore trumps all other defined 
internal structure.  Where a previously selected group internal 
structure or formalization has been found to be disadvantageous to 
the group, consensus process is the ultimate solvent that allows for 
group restructuring without also implying the loss of group identity 
and integrity. 

Inter-group process is an isomorph of the relation between the 
subjective and the objective, and represents/is the actual actions 
of the group (the exercise of group choice) in, on, upon, or within 
the larger world.  Such action is (cannot not be) considered as within 
the 'here and how' and has a sense of immediacy, representing the real 
actions and consequence of the group existence.  Insofar as the specifics 
of that interaction need to be immediate and real-time responsive, the 
optimal choice of organizational principle will be one of merit.  As 
a confirming aspect, it is to be noted that the hierarchal flow down 
model associated with merit based systems of governance are also an 
isomorph of the process of adding specification detail when an abstract 
choice process becomes a concrete one. 

The details of this hybridization can be clarified by considering 
ideal dynamics of the group in the terms of event planning. 
Consensus decision making is used for all decisions regarding the 
basic intentions of each group action and for the practical, pragmatic 
considerations involving the group itself.  For example, decisions 
about membership (either adding or removing), in that it affects 
the being of the group, are made by consensus.  When everyone 
agrees, and in open forum has been allowed to express their feelings, 
doubts, ideas, and intuitions, the group (with this sharing) has 
as a whole come to some deeper insight about the decision, then 
in that mutual agreement, the decision is made.  It is essential 
to the process of consensus that everyone feels good about the final 
outcome, and that each participant feels willing and positive about 
participating.  Within the process of external group action, it is 
important that the statement of intent be something that everyone can wholeheartedly 
support.  In this respect, all group statements of intent are to 
be decided by consensus.  Finally, consensus decision making is used 
to select one of their number, on the basis of their merit, to act 
as a focus for the duration of a specific group action, or as a chair 
for the next consensus meeting.  Collectively, the process of having group 
choice and effort be made on the basis of total agreement reached by 
all members is referred to as a consensus process of decision making. 

Within the context of a specific action, as chosen via consensus in 
the whole group, and as expressed in the group statement of intent, 
the person who was chosen, by consensus, as a focus is temporarily 
empowered to make the single executive decisions about the actual 
event execution. (Note; Having group choice and 
effort be made on the basis of temporary authority invested in a 
focus person is referred to as an "executive" decision making process). 
The focus person, perhaps choosing to listen to the counsel and advice 
of others (when there is time), acts as a basis of a meritocracy. 
The consensus selected focus person organizes the action and is the 
primary decision making agency during the event itself. 
In this respect, for the duration of the action, there is an organizing 
basis that can be responsive to the (occasional) unexpected situation. 

Also, the process of making consensus decision by itself is often 
significantly enhanced when there is someone to act as a facilitator 
of that consensus.  The role of this person is to ensure that 
everyone gets a chance to speak their truth and to attempt to 
summarize the various ideas that have been presented so far.  It is 
the responsibility of the consensus facilitator to try to ensure 
that the consensus process itself works by creating the orderly 
context in which everyone can speak. 

As occasionally will happen, however, in the event that consensus 
is not being reached because of an emotional conflict between members, 
or in the event that the decisions of a selected focus person have 
"gone too far", the democratic process would be used to moderate or 
suspend either of these other two other forms of decision making.  In 
effect, the democratic process can, via an unplanned spontaneous 
majority vote, 1) suspend and veto the decisions of a focus person, 
even to the point of suspending a current action, and thus effect 
an immediate transition back to a consensus method of making decisions, 
or in the event of standing disagreement in consensus (no motion), 
2) act to temporarily suspend the consensus process until the 
situation has 'cooled down' a bit.  As such then, the democratic 
process of majority vote, although it is not used to make any 
group choices in itself, is used to moderate or suspend the effects 
of the other two means used by the group to make decisions (consensus 
decision making and executive decision making).  In this way, the 
democratic process can act as a 'check' on both the meritocratic 
process and the consensus process, to ensure the smooth operation of each. 

In summary then, there are only three basic methods by which group 
decisions are made.  Each of these methods can be used to make two 
different kinds of decisions, one particular to its own modality, and 
one to act as a check on (to moderate the effects of) each of the 
other two methods of decision making.  Each decision making methodology 
has two primary responsibilities, and all three methods together 
account for all (six) basic aspects of group management.  This overall 
arrangement can be restated more compactly and symmetrically as follows: 

      That Consensus process, which is based on the total and heartfelt 
      agreement of all members of the group, is used to make 
      1) all of the important decisions about the being, nature, 
      and intent of the group and its actions, and 2) selecting 
      single individuals to act as a coordinating and decision 
      making focus each particular action, and the group member 
      who will be responsible for facilitating the next consensus 
      decision making meeting of the group (note different people 
      may be chosen for each role). 

      That Executive process, which is based only on the merit and authority 
      of the selected focus person, is used to make decisions about 
      1) the implementation of a specific group external action, and 
      2) how to best enable the consensus decision making 
      process during a group meeting. 

      That Democratic process, which is based on a spontaneous majority 
      vote of those present in any gathering of the group, is used 
      to make only two kinds of decisions: 1) whether to immediately 
      suspend the currently pending executive process (i.e., to 
      indefinitely suspend the authority of the currently acting 
      focus person) and return directly to a consensus decision 
      making process, and/or 2) whether to immediately suspend the 
      currently pending consensus decision making process, with 
      respect to a particular stalled decision.  (Note; In effect, 
      the latter aspect is a transition to a type of executive 
      process, usually to select a focus person who will ensure 
      that the issue is taken up at some (other) future scheduled 
      meeting, or suspended by vote again, if the situation warrants. 
      It is important to let the stalled decision rest for the 
      remainder of the current meeting, so that other issues can be 
      discussed if needed). 

Aside from its simplicity, this hybridization has numerous advantages 
for a small group.  Consensus process is used to make all of 
the important decisions which affect the group as a whole.  Consensus 
decision making serves as the foundation for all group activities and 
allows each of the group members to come to know one another more 
deeply.  As such, consensus decision making allows the group as a whole 
to come to one mind about an issue.  In sharing insights each person may 
more easily come to feel good about the decisions that are made.  This 
enables the group to be whole, and acting as a whole, to be strong, 
and thus enabled to work in a healthy and sustainable manner.  Overall, 
the consensus process 
provides the group with the ability to make high quality decisions in 
the places where high quality choices are most needed.  By allowing for 
transition to executive process, the cumbersome aspects of consensus 
decision making are avoided.  By allowing supercession by democratic 
process, a stuck or blocked consensus process can be prevented from 
halting or freezing the group, ensuring that the group as a whole will 
remain responsive, effective, and at peace with itself. 

Executive process allows for the group to have the necessary 
structured organization, responsiveness, and flexibility needed 
to cope with the vast number of details of rapidly changing conditions 
associated with the external environment (and the unexpected dynamics of life). 
Executive process also provides the context and facilitating basis for effective 
consensus decision making within a group.  Overall, the executive 
process provides the group with the ability to make rapid and numerous 
decisions in the situations where immediacy and decisiveness is most 
needed.  By allowing supercession by the democratic process, the 
executive process can be prevented from becoming dominating, or misused, 
ensuring that the group remains healthy. 

Democratic process ensures that neither the consensus process nor 
the executive process ever becomes disabling.  By ensuring that there 
is always a method for checking or relieving problematic situations 
(such as halted or overly contentious group meetings and possible abuses 
of focus authority), these other two forms of decision making are made 
more sure and secure and the problems of rhetoric and loss of essence 
associated with democratic process are avoided. 

Overall, by maintaining a good balance and mixture of these three 
types of decision making processes, the membership of a group should 
be able to integrate in a healthy manner with the strength and 
flexibility necessary for high quality combined works.  The 
particular disadvantages of each type of decision making process are 
offset by a balanced transition to the advantages of each of the other 
types.  In this way, the best of all possible groups can be realized.

Ultra-brief summary of the Small Group Method:

That Consensus process
is used for all intra-group decision making 
*and* to setup the basis for executive process decision making. 

That Executive process 
is used for all extra-group decision making. 

That Democratic process 
is used as a check on, and spontaneous 
transition from, 
executive process back to consensus process.

Detailed Description of Small Group Method:

Consensus process decision making is used for:.

      - 1; selecting/electing the individual who will act as the 
      facilitator and/or chair of the consensus process itself. 
      - 2; defining or redefining the membership, internal structure, 
      named intent, values, objectives, dreams and aspirations, etc, 
      of the group. 
      - 3; selecting/electing the individual who will act as a focus of 
      responsibility and authority for a specific group external range 
      of action. 

Consensus methods are always used to define all decisions 
in relation to the being of the group itself, the basis 
of choice for its actions, and the focus of responsibility 
and authority to implement those actions. 

Consensus methods are never used for decisions specific to 
implementing an external action of the group, nor are they used 
for suspending or withdrawing authority/responsibility from a 
previously selected focus.  Consensus process methods also 
cannot be used to moderate the process of consensus itself. 

Executive process (meritocratic) decision making is used for:. 

      - 1; the implementation of a specific group external action. 

      - 2; how to best enable the consensus decision making 
      process during a group meeting. 

Executive process methods are always used to define all 
decisions in relation to the action, the doing of the 
group itself.  Executive process, as mediated by a consensus 
selected focus person acting in accordance with consensus 
process resolved intents, is used to implement selected group 
activities externally and to facilitate the consensus process internally. 

Executive process is never used to make any decision relating 
to the being of the group. 

Democratic process, which is based on a spontaneous majority 
vote of those present in any majority gathering of the group, 
is used to make only two kinds of decisions:. 

      - 1; whether to immediately suspend the currently pending 
      executive process (i.e., to indefinitely suspend the authority 
      of the currently acting focus person) and return directly to 
      a consensus decision making process; this has the effect of 
      transitioning the group from 'doing' back to 'being'. 

      - 2; whether to immediately suspend the currently pending 
      consensus decision making process, with respect to a particular 
      stalled decision, and elect a different consensus facilitator. 

Democratic process is used as a check on both the consensus 
process and the executive process of the group and is used 
for no other purpose.  Voting decisions are of exactly two 
kinds: 1) whether to have a vote, and 2) whether to dismiss 
the currently selected focus person.  Both of these decisions 
are yes/no (boolean).  Whenever a majority requests a vote, 
a vote is held.  A vote can be requested by a gathered majority 
of the group at any time.  A majority result on a vote can be 
used to immediately revoke the executive process authority 
of a previously selected focus person or consensus facilitator, 
(allowing for a new consensus facilitator to be elected by 
consensus, if needed).

Notes on the group action/identity distinction

Insofar as the method of sustainable small group formation
described above is characterized on a being/doing distinction 
(the identity of the group as contrasted with the action of 
the group), it is important to be able to clarify which 
group decisions (interaction events) are to be classified 
as belonging to which category (intra-group or extra-group 
interactions).  The clarity of this resolution is essential 
as it defines which choices are within the scope of the 
consensus decision making process and which decisions are 
within the scope of the executive decision making process. 

The basis for the distinction is found in the notion of 
observability.  If the effects and consequences of a decision 
are concretely visible to people who are not members of the 
group, then the decision/choice is regarded as external and 
part of the action of the group (extra-group interactions). 
Otherwise, by default, all remaining decisions are considered 
to be internal (intra-group interactions). 

Implicit in this description is the assumption that all 
group internal processes (the internal communications of 
the group used to establish and consummate consensus process) 
are maintained in a manner NOT visible to non-members.  The 
reason for this apparent secrecy associated with consensus 
process is associated with the need for the group identity 
to be internally (rather than externally) defined.  External 
agencies with visibility to the group internal process would 
likely attempt to use this information to influence the 
internal dynamics of the group.  Such influence would allow 
non-members to functionally act as if possessing the privileges 
of group membership, this weakening the significance of 
membership, and thus the identity, of the group itself. 
Insofar as the notion of membership is always, inherently, 
and explicitly defined as isomorphic with the being of the 
group, it is always an internal decision and should not 
visible to group outsiders (even by indirection and inference). 
As such, all communications associated with group consensus 
process are considered to be private to the membership of 
the group itself.

Structural integration into larger group forms

As outlined above, the hybrid dynamic of group organizational
process using combined consensus, executive, and democratic 
decision making methods is only directly applicable to small 
groups.  The reason for this limitation is twofold. 1) Insofar 
as consensus decision making implies and usually requires full 
communication between all members of a group, and where the 
number of inter-member messages rises geometrically in proportion 
to the number of members, the communicative bandwidth required 
of each member can quickly rise beyond the carrying capacity of 
that individual.  2) Where executive process requires an explicitly 
defined focus and range, the selection of that focus and its 
degree of asymmetry must be commensurate with the grain size 
of the group (ie, exactly one member).  Where the level of 
focus asymmetry is too high, the demand stress on the selected 
individual can exceed the available capabilities of that 
person and/or require the formation of subgroup counsels; the 
added complexity of which does not translate very efficiently 
when considering the democratic process override on executive 
process. 

Given these constraints, the hybrid process can only validly 
be applied directly to groups in the range of 6 to 30 members 
(extreme limits) with groups of 10 to 16 members being 
considered optimal.  However, larger organizations can be 
composed of smaller ones by re-identifying the small group 
itself as a member cell in a larger meta-group similarly 
organized and constituted in aggregate as with each small 
group.  This process can be continued for any number of 
levels of scale so as to be able to form coherent 
organizations of any number of individuals operating in 
aggregate.  This composition method defines a specifically 
bottom-up topology for larger groups (grassroots organizations). 

Insofar as the interactions between groups in forming 
a composition meta-group are effectively external to the 
groups themselves, the action of intergroup communications 
within the context of the meta-group need to be mediated via 
executive process.  This has the implication that the 
individual cell groups must be internally healthy enough 
so as to select one of their internal members to act as a 
liaison in communications with other groups on behalf of 
the local membership.  This in effect constitutes a form 
of local group representation, where the representative is 
effectively immediately answerable to the represented cell 
group by democratic override and consensus process. 

Also, insofar as the communicative bandwidth limits identified 
above will apply to the representative individual, it is 
important that some composition constraints be observed: 

      - 1; The number of component cell groups in any meta-group 
      must not exceed the communicative capacity limits of a 
      representative individual, and therefore, each meta-level 
      can consist of at most 20 or so component groups.  It is 
      preferred that different focus representatives be elected 
      for each compositional level so as to not exceed the 
      capabilities of any specific group member (Note; this is 
      particularly relevant where meta-groups are themselves 
      combined into meta-meta-groups). 

      - 2; The membership decision of a cell group within a meta-group, 
      insofar as it is an aspect of the being/identity of both the 
      cell group and the meta-group, must be made by positive consensus 
      at both group levels.  The choice of the cell group to belong to 
      a meta-group, as determined by the cell group, is not the decision 
      of the elected representative, but is the result of an achieved 
      cell group consensus.  From the perspective of the meta-group, 
      the membership of the cell group is defined by the consensus 
      of all of the participating cell groups as mediated through 
      their elected representatives.  Only where both conditions hold 
      is cell membership in the meta-group established. 

Finally, it is noted that in the same manner that a single 
individual can be a member of multiple groups (although this is 
not necessary nor desirable), so also can specific cell groups 
have membership in multiple meta-groups.  In this manner networks 
of interchange can be created for arbitrarily complex structures. 
This has the distinct advantage that while the specific structure 
is everywhere clear, there is no concentration of organizational 
complexity (or points of failure) at any particular locus within 
the overall system.