TITL:
   *Exponent Time and Epistemic Speculations*
   *By Forrest Landry*,
   *November 1st, 2020*.

ABST:
   As considering a speculative observation
   of how we, as human beings, tend to observe
   and notice the significance of events in time
   on the basis of an apparent exponential progression.

   As also considering the implied social process
   and biases against having technical theories.

TEXT:

   > What is the basic idea of 'exponent time'?.

   Overall, crossing nearly nine orders of magnitude
   (in time, energy transit, transactional process)
   we see a number of significant changes
   in the 'space' in which the dynamic
   of evolutionary process is operating --
   what is meant by code,
   what is changing, and how, etc.

:sra
   > How far does a pattern of 'significant events'
   > in log/exponential time continue to hold?.

   Since chemistry produced the first cell,
   it took approximately four billion years
   for that single cell life to do its thing.
   Yet in 1/10th of that time,
   a mere 400 million years --
   (note; the exact numbers are not that important)
   an entire world of multi-cellular life
   was created and explored whole new dimensions
   of being, of evolutionary process.
   What we think of as 'brain' and 'intelligence'
   is mostly only a late stage part of this process.

   Approximating again, we can notice that
   the particular species of monkeys and apes, etc,
   are more like 40 million years old,
   and what we think of as 'interesting'
   in relation to being 'like humans'
   is a mere four million years old.
   To keep the pattern,
   we will next want to go 1/10th of that,
   or maybe an additional 1/10th further.

   Again, expressing this wildly approximately,
   we can see that some 40 thousand years ago,
   that there starts to be some sort of 'human' tool usage.
   It may be really rudimentary, but it is there.

   In this, we have gone from a embodied/atoms vs
   to a virtualized/code evolutionary perspective;
   and this is indeed a huge change and development.
   Rather than having to grow new limbs,
   specialized cell tissue, organs, and the like,
   we can 'add new features and functionality'
   to the species, after birth, via "culture".
   Atoms are still being moved around,
   but now the results occur *much* more quickly,
   and with purpose and intention,
   rather than just by some sort of randomness.
   Tools represent a really significant upgrade
   in the capability of humans taken collectively,
   and mark the first true emergence
   of 'technology' as a phenomena.

   Also, something like 40 thousand years ago,
   we start to see more actual social behavior --
   'tribes' rather than just 'troupes' --
   as well as things like specific
   "elective" functional relationships.
   Domestication (both human and animal)
   starts to become possible as a phenomena.
   At least some form of verbal communication
   and/or spoken or gestural language develops.
   'Behavioral modernity' develops,
   according to the "great leap forward" theory (@ 3 #note3).

   The notion of 'social' and 'cultural'
   is itself a kind of technology --
   a kind of virtualized code,
   changing in an abstracted domain of action,
   one that no longer depends on
   just the random motion of atoms (@ 4 #note4).

:sxj
   Looking for significant and defining
   'evolution process type' events
   at approximately 4,000 years ago,
   we see the emergence of agriculture, grain storage,
   and thus recognizable economic systems and trade,
   cities and groupings larger than tribes,
   and a transition from just spoken languages
   to more common occurrences of written ones.
   This has all sorts of also side effects,
   and creates entirely new domains
   of evolutionary process and action.
   We now have evolution of cultural forms,
   narrative, music, dance, and the arts,
   market/monetary systems, religious systems,
   city building methodologies,
   civilization and civility process, etc.

   Our next wild approximation at 400 years
   finds what western people call "the enlightenment",
   where the notion of abstract causal process,
   the epistemology of the scientific method itself,
   gets developed and now technology,
   as applied causal understanding,
   really takes off.
   More than just writing books by hand,
   and doing everything manually,
   we now are starting to design and build machines.

   The last 40 years
   has seen the development of computers
   and the internet --
   more social change in less time
   than in all of the prior epochs --
   the very essence of what it means
   to be on an exponential curve.
   One does not have to dig very hard to see this
   as a basic change in the way 'social works',
   in nearly every aspect of human life.

   The basic notion to notice is that the timeline
   of what we consider to be 'important' and 'meaningful',
   in terms of thresholds of evolutionary process,
   are all occurring on an approximately
   logarithmic time scale,
   for the most part of the past:.

     As 4 billion years of Earth, of cell biology,
     to 400 million years of multicellular life,
     to 40 million years of animals with brains,
     to 4 million years of apes with social process,
     to 400 thousand years of humans and tribes,
     to 40 thousand years of humans and tools,
     to 4 thousand years of mass agriculture tech,
     to 4 hundred years of western industrialization,
     to 40 years of mass availability of compute.

   Given this sort of trend, it is *maybe* quite
   possible to consider that there might be a risk
   of an exponential time scale into the future.
   If so, that would be bad, as that
   the maximum rate of change
   that human life can adapt to,
   is actually both finite and largely fixed --
   carbon based life simply cannot endure
   arbitrary levels of change rapidity.
   This makes tech development itself a category
   of existential risk for all life on the planet.

:t2c
   > Do the actual specific dates actually matter?.

   No.  Only the rough ranges of size are relevant.

   The observation is not the specific actual intervals.
   Random factors will drive a lot of evolutionary process,
   so we can expect random event timing deviancy from
   the 'perfected moment' for each event to occur.
   We can expect each actual date to be 'off'
   by as much as a half a magnitude,
   and still have the overall principle and idea be correct.

   We are concerned with the structural progression,
   in terms of function,
   of increasing degrees of existence
   and then of the virtualization of code,
   and then of the effects that this has
   on time, capability, available energy/power, etc,
   so as to attempt to gain a clearer sense
   of the relevant factors, principles, etc.

:t3w
   > Does the "exponent time" concept extend forward?.

   > I take it you are considering what happens
   > over the next four years,
   > and then after that, just the next four months,
   > and then at that point, in four days?.

   No, not really.
   At least, not that I am personally aware of,
   though it could, in theory, occur that way.
   Ask someone about the 'AGI fast takeoff' scenario.

:t9u
   > Where in regards to AGI/APS x-risk research;
   > What do you mean by 'the long term'?.

   Prudence would consider what would likely develop
   given current trends, over the next 40 years.

   'Civilization design' considers things like
   what happens over the next 400 years.

   "Long term conscious sustainable evolution"
   considers, after that, what actually happens
   over the next 4,000 years thereafter.

   Also, if we are truly trying to address
   certain truly terrible categories of x-risk
   (such as the AGI/APS takeover problem)
   we should be thinking about the next
   4 and 400 million years or so too.

:tlg
   > Are you advocating a kind of "temporal chauvinism"?.
   > As the belief that we somehow think
   > that we are in the end time,
   > that "the end times are now", etc,
   > or that we have a 'privileged position'
   > to make such assessments etc?.

   Perhaps it could be argued
   that there is a 'dogma of cultural relativism' --
   one that asserts that the notion
   of 'all cultures are equally valid'
   as a kind of 'irreducible absolute ground truth'.

      > Is a culture that holds all other cultures as 'equal'
      > somehow "better than" all other cultures?
      > On what basis could we know that?
      > Can any such assertion be made
      > without already inherently presupposing
      > such a concept of 'relativism is better'
      > as an implied "fact"?

      > In arguing/claiming that someone,
      > or some group is being chauvinistic,
      > are they not implicitly actually acting
      > in that way themselves?

      > Which is worse -- labeling someone else
      > as being potentially guilty of a crime,
      > while actually covertly implementing that same crime?

   These sorts of questions, while important,
   are also outside of the scope of our present concerns.

   Insofar as it is probably impossible to say anything
   and not make any assumptions at all,
   it is probably a good thing, for now at least,
   at least when thinking about x-risk critical concerns
   about things like AGI/APS/superintelligence alignment.
   It suggests that we should be as careful as we can
   to only use the most general principles
   in which we can have the most confidence,
   so that we can at least have some hope
   of trusting our thinking process herein.

   As such, though there is no reason to believe,
   aside from the kind of induction
   associated with things like 'Moore's law'
   that such a trend could/would continue,
   (ie; by some sort of general inductive argument)
   the progression as noticed and stated
   does lend itself to some concerns and consideration
   as to the means and mechanisms of 'hard AI takeoff'.

   Given that tools/machines
   of any kind at all (ie, not AGI, APS, ML, etc)
   have only visibly appeared in the geological record
   in the last few thousand years, at most,
   it is not too surprising
   that we do not --
   at least at an evolutionary level --
   have very much experience in --
   no built in history or evolutionary psychology at all --
   of dealing with this kind of x-risk.
   Nature has not prepared us for tech.

   Hence, to think about tech issues clearly,
   we will for sure need
   to depend more on things like
   abstract notions of evolution,
   the basis epistemic process, etc,
   in order to identify the important issues
   and tools of thinking.

:tw6
   > Does the concept model of exponent time
   > extend further backwards as well?

   Actually, from a scientific perspective,
   it turns out to be impossible to answer.
   You could try to talk back another 10 billion years,
   prior to the Earth planet formation
   and see that that would take you to the very
   beginning of the universe (according to current theory).

   We could say that chemistry depends on physics,
   asserting some sort of 'reduction methodology'
   as being the basis of understanding, modeling, etc.
   However, on close inspection, it turns out that
   reductive models are rather difficult to support.

   However, while in theory that all of chemistry
   *should* be understood and predicted purely
   in terms of the 'standard model' of particle physics
   and maybe fully by Quantum mechanical theories,
   yet in actual practice, the calculations
   are way too complex to actually do,
   even on really fast modern supercomputers.
   This leaves the notion of "reduction"
   as 'un-testable' and 'unproven',
   in far more than the expected number of places.

   Admitting this truth, in public, turns out to be
   a political problem more than a philosophical one,
   and so is generally avoided in polite company.

   Moreover, there seem to be areas of chemistry --
   what look like some sort of emergent properties --
   for which it is unclear as to how to derive these
   from Quantum Mechanics (QM) type formulations at all.
   Not all that is known to be 'law' in chemistry
   can be derived purely on the basis of extensions
   of any currently known variation of QM and/or
   any currently know particle interaction theories.

:ubl
   However, leaving these potential issues aside,
   even when we just look at just pure physics,
   it is not always clear what is going on.
   The two major well verified theories,
   Quantum Mechanics (QM) and General Relativity (GR)
   are provably, absolutely, and fundamentally irreconcilable --
   we simply do not actually have a single working model
   of theoretical physics.

   And then, as if that was not enough by itself,
   as has been demonstrated elsewhere in a similar manner
   as with the Godel theorem (as discovered
   within mathematics approximately a century ago),
   any notion of a Grand Unified Theory of Everything (TOE)
   as to be/become a 'complete theory of physics'
   must be rejected fundamentally as a viable concept.
     (see recent work regarding the Bell Theorem, for example).
   Nonetheless, despite this sort of problem,
   lots of people are still proposing lots of ideas --
   few which are even testable --
   let alone things everyone takes as 'agreed upon' (@ 1 #note1).

:ujg
   Nearly all working physicists do at least agree,
   when considering the vast duration and volume of
   the total history and span of the universe,
     (at least insofar as currently understood by science,
     ie; since the "big bang" event, at the very least),
   that the laws of physics themselves
   do not (did not) change (have not changed)
     (at least not by very much --
     there have been set max observational bounds
     on the max level of possible law change,
     as defined as an estimated/calibrated outcome
     of various kinds of astronomical observation).

   However, in a more general social sense,
   the notion of 'unchanging laws of physics'
   is based on an even more basic concept,
   ie; that of symmetry.
   The notion of symmetry is 'built into'
   the very epistemic process of science itself --
   something which is generally called
   "The Scientific Method" (TM, (c), etc),
   at such a foundational level
   that it has become largely unconscious
   and thus very nearly/inherently unobservable
   (ie, we make the symmetry assumption without
   noticing that we are also actually making
   the symmetry assumption, etc).

:urc
   This inherent and direct pre- assumption
   of the absolute preeminence
   of the notion of symmetry --
   that the universe is lawful in itself --
   that it can be understood at all --
   that it has any causal regularity,
   or rather so much causal regularity,
   that "the universe" can be safely assumed
   to be 100% absolutely regular
   in the sense of 'regular causation',
   as baked into the very essence of
   what is meant by 'scientific epistemology'.

   The net result is that it is impossible
   for nearly all practicing/working physicists
   to even imagine or conceive of 'the universe'
   as being any other way, at all, ever.
   The assumption and faith
   of a final and absolute symmetry
   is so deep into the conceptual substrata,
   that any notion of thinking in any other way,
   on the basis of any other concept
   (such as continuity) is simply 'maximally heretical'.
   This remains true in public, aside from
   some quiet unguarded moments
   amidst some especially wild drunken parties.
   Otherwise, any discussion of the forgoing
   can be expected to be immediately dismissed
   out of hand (@ 2 #note2).

:v3n
   Most physicists will regard it as inherently wrong
   that there can be any notion
   that the 'laws of physics'
   would even potentially undergo
   any sort of 'process of change' at all --
   let alone some sort of recursive 'proto- evolution' dynamic.
   It is so far outside the 'Overton window'
   of what can be discussed described, or even mentioned,
   in any reputable academic setting,
   in other words, everywhere that matters --
   that it is simply not going to happen.
   The notion will never even get a hearing --
   no one in that community
   has the conceptual apparatus necessary to handle it.

   Without overhauling the epistemic and social/cultural
   foundations of what it means 'to do science' --
   ie; of the scientific method
   as a specific type of epistemic process,
   itself a specialization of the more general notion
   of process itself,
   we are therefore forced to regard the question as
   'inherently unanswerable' using any variation
   of the current set of physical and mathematical tools
   developed for handling and understanding (just)
   ((at least indirectly) observable) causation.

:v5j
   > How does this sort of group social bias happen?.
   > What is your speculative theory of the process?.
   > Does it just happen in technical groups/topics?.

   Overall, I think that this is a human effect,
   regardless of topic or community of interest.
   I do notice it does seem to happen more often
   in STEM type groups -- engineering, comp sci, math,
   and especially physics and AI safety communities.
   For the relevant specific example, I do think
   that the same problem *does* often also occur
   in many current online AI discussion groups
   concerned with product development social effects,
   'effective altruism', etc.

   In any highly motivated, highly funded,
   and/or highly prestigious social group,
   particularly ones where the social factors
   are suppressed due to more than
   a few of such participant people being of
   those types of neuro- divergence
   that are either on the autism spectrum
     (ie, engineers, technologists, comp-sci people),
   and/or are implicitly conditioned by those
   on the narcissism/pathology spectrum
     (ie, the bosses, CEOs, managers, owners, VC people,
     stockholders and all other manner of petty dictators)
   when there is any threat to the common concept hype,
   the narrative of progress, benefit, modernism, etc,
   particularly around fundamental conceptual issues
   of understanding, intelligence, social standing, etc,
   the resulting mob habit
   will be to have the offending signal squelched
   as close to its origin in time, space, and possibility,
   as quickly as possible,
   sooner than even immediately.

   Where one half of a group is socially naive
   to the dynamics of social power and manipulation
   and the other is very actively invested (lots of money)
   in such social power and manipulation (institutions),
   that anything that is occurring on the interface
   of things having to do with at once
     atoms/physics (ie, substrate issues in the real world),
     and logic/math/algorithms/models (virtualized simulations)
     and also social process, bias, power, and culture
     (in the form of market and institutional process, etc)
   that there is going to be problems of understanding --
   some will not want to,
   and some will not want others to.
   Anything else than a total absolute censoring reaction
   would be deemed 'socially unacceptable' --
   and a kind of career suicide for the speaker.
   This is a strong dissuasion
   for anyone to ask such deadly questions.
   This overall effect, happening at the group level
   due purely to aggregate social process effects
   is an excellent example of 'sociological bias'.

:vyq
   Unfortunately, for anything involving actual x-risk,
   even the unconscious principle needs to be examined.
   Ethical integrity and intellectual honesty/humility
   would demand that we give appropriate care and concern
   to anything we all hold dear --
   all of life itself.

:note1:
   As an aside, the overall situation of their being
   an the incompleteness in/of hard physical theory
   reminds me of the search for a 'loophole'
   for which the Thermodynamics is "not True",
   and for which an 'over unity' energy machine
   can be made (an impossible and futile task)
   misconceived as it is in its origin.

   People think that because "not everything is known"
   that there is therefore "some sort of possibility"
   that they could somehow evade some of
   the more basic established truths.
   This sort of excuse mongering is distasteful.
   It represents a kind of intellectual dishonesty.

   In the AI/AGI/APS "safety community"
   there are any number of people who currently,
   presently and similarly believing in
   some sort of a "perpetual benefit machine"
     (ie, what AGI/APS/superintelligence actually is,
     when you consider what claims people make
     when attempting to hype/convince us
     that such a device would be
     the most wonderful thing ever, etc)
   in much the same way that people
   two centuries ago
   kept trying to make (and sell!)
   some sort of 'perpetual' motion machine.
   Both inherently involve ideas of
   'something from noting', forever,
   with no input investment or consumption of
   time, space, or effort/energy 'resources' at all.

   Except this time, they are 'playing with matches'.
   Working with pattern (ie. perpetual alignment)
   is very different than
   working with energy (ie, perpetual energy)
   as it would be different than
   working with atoms (ie, perpetual value --
   or what would otherwise be called 'alchemy',
   the search for the philosophers stone, etc).
   That all three of these notions are simply,
   and should be very obviously, impossible.
   Yet every age seems to have a new crop
   of the deluded.

   The main issue is that while energy dissipates,
   that pattern replicates (given any available
   and reasonably persistent energy gradient).
   Hence, things like 'viral effects'
   can amplify small problems and events
   into much larger and more serious concerns.
   While atoms are considered
   purely in terms of additive processes,
   and where energy is concerned purely with
   issues and dynamics of multiplicative process;
   that pattern must be considered in terms of
   logarithmic and *exponential* process.
   This makes 'problems with patterns'
   and any sort of popular delusions involving same
   *very8 much more dangerous overall
   than even the very worst things involving
   misuse of energy (example; atomic weapons).

   While human organic minds/brains have evolved
   so as to be able to natively deal with
   things that have additive effects,
   and where a few of us (a somewhat smaller
   than expected portion of the population)
   has learned to be able to think naturally about
   phenomena in the space of multiplicative process,
   that very few humans have ever actually come
   to have real intuitions/effectivity
   when considering exponential effects/processes.
   It simply does not make sense to most people
   as a news anchor sound byte, in popular discourse,
   and hence issues and dynamics of pandemics
   tend to be somewhat of a surprise --
   to common catastrophic.

:note2:
   Notice for example how that even the topic
   of 'philosophy', or worse, of "metaphysics",
   is completely forbidden to consider
   in anything other than polite company --
   ie, in the intellectual world or political world
   (which is usually the opposite of 'polite').

:note3:
   Interestingly, some anthropologist philosophers
   suggest that we attribute this development
   to humans getting stoned on 'magic mushrooms',
   and thus of having visions, and thus also of
   getting spiritual, religious, etc, in community.
   Via this background process, art becomes real,
   which has further implications with respect to
   the formation of tribes, cultural groups,
   extended family and community,
   new forms of social altruism, etc.

:note4:
   Of the at least 20 million species on Earth,
   only 20 or so developed social process.
   Apparently the brain compute necessary to support
   estimation of the intentions of some of your peers
   takes so much energy that it ends up being
   very very expensive for any species
   to implement and demonstrate true social aspects
   (rather than, say, 'herding' as with sheep).
   Our species took such developments much further.
