TITL:
   *The Great Horse Manure Crisis of 1894*
   by Ben Johnson

ABST:
   Gives an example of how widely deployed solutions
   at one time can be the source/cause of
   many new future downstream problems.

PREF:

   > that some potentially/currently unknown/unseen influence
   > could end up being really important.

   Agreed; and we see this all the time with technology.
   There is no such thing as a 'neutral technology'.
   We learn about some unintended consequence
   long after the "good idea" has been widely deployed.

   As a nice example, see the story copied inline below
     About the ambient environmental effects of horse usage,
     as now replaced by the pollution issues associated with
     cars (lead, global warming, piles of tires, toxins, etc).

TEXT:

   By the late 1800s, large cities all around the world were
   'drowning in horse manure'.
   In order for these cities to function,
   they were dependent on thousands of horses
   for the transport of both people and goods.

   In 1900, there were over 11,000 hansom cabs
   on the streets of London alone.
   There were also several thousand horse-drawn buses,
   each needing 12 horses per day,
   making a staggering total of over 50,000 horses
   transporting people around the city each day.

   To add to this,
   there were yet more horse-drawn carts and drays
   delivering goods around what was then
   the largest city in the world.

   This huge number of horses created major problems.
   The main concern was the large amount of manure
   left behind on the streets.
   On average a horse will produce between 15 and 35 pounds
   of manure per day,
   so you can imagine the sheer scale of the problem.
   The manure on London's streets also attracted
   huge numbers of flies
   which then spread typhoid fever and other diseases.

   Each horse also produced around 2 pints of urine per day
   and to make things worse,
   the average life expectancy for a working horse
   was only around 3 years.
   Horse carcasses therefore also had to be removed
   from the streets.
   The bodies were often left to putrefy
   so the corpses could be more easily sawn into pieces
   for removal.

   The streets of London were beginning to poison its people.

   But this wasn't just a British crisis:
   New York had a population of 100,000 horses
   producing around 2.5m pounds of manure a day.

   This problem came to a head when in 1894,
   The Times newspaper predicted:
     "In 50 years, every street in London
     will be buried under nine feet of manure".

   This became known as the 'Great Horse Manure Crisis of 1894'.

   The terrible situation was debated in 1898
   at the world's first international urban planning conference
   in New York,
   but no solution could be found.
   It seemed urban civilization was doomed.

   However, necessity is the mother of invention,
   and the invention in this case was that of motor transport.
   Henry Ford came up with a process of building motor cars
   at affordable prices.
   Electric trams and motor buses appeared on the streets,
   replacing the horse-drawn buses.

   By 1912, this seemingly insurmountable problem
   had been resolved; in cities all around the globe,
   horses had been replaced
   and now motorized vehicles
   were the main source of transport and carriage.

   Even today, in the face of a problem with no apparent solution,
   people often quote 'The Great Horse Manure Crisis of 1894',
   urging people not to despair, something will turn up!

      > note added: Ie; so many people still somehow believe
      > that technology created and curated by transactional markets
      > will (eventually) solve all of our (human/humanity) problems.
      > How quaint!.

ATTR:
   - that the above content is as found at (@ URL https://www.historic-uk.com/HistoryUK/HistoryofBritain/Great-Horse-Manure-Crisis-of-1894/).
